Stephen’s kangaroo rat (Dipodomys stephensi) is a keystone species of Western rangeland that provide an essential role as ecosystem engineers. These rodents contribute to soil health, seed dispersal, and vegetation structure through their burrowing and seed-caching behaviours (Longland and Dimitri 2021). Human influences as habitat fragmentation, urbanization, and invasive species have driven (SKR) to endangerment. The Shier and Swaisgood (2012) reintroduction project aimed to establish a self-sustaining population of SKRs, addressing conservation concerns and restoring an ecological niche. Their work improved upon previous efforts, despite facing some unforeseen challenges.
Reintroduction efforts for kangaroo rats have historically had high failure rates. Studies by O’Farrell and Spencer demonstrated high mortality rates, with no surviving SKR beyond a year post-release (1994; 2003, cited in Shier et al. 2021). The frequently fatal consequences of neglecting ecological and social factors, ultimately, was downfall of these projects. Shier and Swaisgood (2012) sought to overcome these consequences by focusing on these factors to ensure the establishment of a viable population. Their study introduced, in particular, three novel strategies aimed at enhancing reintroduction success:
    1. The team recognised the importance of social dynamics in SKR populations, leveraging the ‘dear enemy effect’, wherein SKR are more comfortable when reintroduced alongside neighbours familiar to them from the origin site (Temeles 1994, cited in Shier et al. 2021). By grouping individuals from the same neighbourhoods, Shier and Swaisgood (2012) aimed to reduce territorial conflicts and increase more tenable behaviours. Behavioural observations by Shier et al. (2021) confirmed that SKRs reintroduced with familiar neighbours, indeed, spent more time foraging and vigilant and less time fighting than those reintroduced in unfamiliar groups.
    2. The reintroduction site was tailored to enhance SKR habitat suitability. Invasive grasses, which hindered movement and burrowing, factors believed to be strenuous on newly established SKR populations, were removed through trimming and controlled burns (Shier and Swaisgood 2012). Additionally, nest boxes and retention cages provided temporary shelters during a week-long acclimation period, which reduced predation and displacement.
    3. Shier and Swaisgood (2012) implemented electric-tape fencing in an attempt to reduce predation by medium size terrestrial predators. In response to harvester ant invasions into nesting boxes, the team also installed insect adhesive barriers around the retention cages. These methods, though sometimes proving fallible, played a role in mitigating predation impacts.
Freymiller et al. (2017) evidenced that greater display of vigilance behaviour more than halved kangaroo rats’ reaction times (P < 0.0001) and slightly increased take-off velocity (+~20%, P = 0.016) against simulated snake attacks. These effects are imperative to evade birds of prey and meso-carnivores that concerned Shier and Swaisgood (2012), for future reproductive success, and, therefore, the establishment of a sustainable population. The increased vigilance seen in neighbourhoods introduced together, in addition to greater time spent foraging, are critical factors for long-term survival, which was supported by their survival data. By 2017, the population had grown to 148 individuals, with 85 in reproductive condition, indicating a successful reintroduction (Shier et al. 2021).
In addition to this, there were other clear merits to the approaches taken by Shier and Swaisgood (2012). The planning, trapping, tagging, and mapping of neighbourhood associations ensured a more thorough understanding of SKR social structures and ecological needs, which not only provided them with dependable information, but enhances other teams’ understanding of SKR population dynamics. The targeted habitat modifications, like invasive grass removal, created an environment conducive to SKR activities, facilitating their integration into the ecosystem. They studied these interactions too, and were able to observe increased SKR activity (defined by number of burrows) of using controlled fires over mowing over leaving the grasses untreated.
Despite these merits, the method used by Shier and Swaisgood (2012) is not completely satisfactory. While the use of nest boxes and retention cages during the acclimation period did provide a controlled, soft-release transition period, the team did not compare the effect of this over a hard-release approach. Given this is one of the more resource intensive aspects of the study, it would be very desirable to quantify from a cost-benefit analysis perspective. Furthermore, Shier et al. (2021) cite the project’s success as owing to ‘collaboration with land managers and federal, state and local agencies,’ which, while undoubtedly highlighting the importance of multi-stakeholder partnerships in conservation efforts, does also suggest that future projects will also depend on these very same agencies, for better or for worse.
Through the course of the reintroduction, Shier and Swaisgood (2012) were able to affirm many of their hypotheses regarding SKR presenting the dear enemy effect​, and the effect that invasive grass maintenance might have on SKR activity – though the long-term effort to required combat invasive grass is still unsolved. However, they also learned beyond their initial research questions, for instance in discovering the ineffectiveness of electric-tape fencing due to the perverse result of creating vantage points for birds of prey. Additionally, the post hoc deployment of insect adhesives is a definite example of a lesson learned here. 
The success of this project raises potential applications for reintroducing other heteromyid species, which may experience similar population dynamics or exhibit similar behaviours to the SKR’s. The further, phylogenetically, that this research may generalise, the less overall resources need to be invested in multiple highly specific studies. Even if not, the methods employed, specifically trapping, tagging, and soft-releasing of animals, by Shier and Swaisgood (2012) were highly resource-intensive, and further research may be able to develop more efficient ways to approach certain problems like working out which SKR’s are ‘familiar neighbours’ at the origin site, in order that smaller projects can recreate this. This may be especially relevant, as Longland and Dimitri (2021) note, given that climate change poses additional threats to kangaroo rats, which will make adaptive conservation strategies necessary to ensure the proliferation of kangaroo rats.
In conclusion, Shier and Swaisgood (2012) reintroduction of Stephen’s kangaroo rats does indicate that a targeted approach that considers the interactions within populations, as opposed to our understanding based on individuals’ behaviours, in this area of conservation biology can create a successful project. By prioritising social structures, habitat modifications, and with help from those collaborative efforts, the project achieved substantial success, establishing a self-sustaining SKR population with expected, broader ecological benefits. However, there do remain challenges around predator control and long-term habitat suitability management. Continued research and adaptive strategies will be essential to ensure their survival and ecological contributions.
