The complexity of the World has always fascinated me, but as I've grown older, I have become more aware of its nuances. With a better sense of all that is happening in the world, I've realized that it's not just me: things actually are very complex and complicated.
Perhaps without question, when I arrived at secondary school, I had come to accept Science was the only true way to discover, understand, and explain the happenings of this world. But I loved it. Einstein and Hawking seemed like, and we are told are, the *ultimate geniuses*; people who knew everything. As far as intelligence and insight were concerned, medicine and rocket science seemed to represent the pinnacle of human achievement. I felt that science was the place for me, and that I would change the world through a great discovery or invention; that was where I would make my great contribution.
So much noise fills today's world. Social media bombards people with images, and words, and the attendant ideas and emotions, and the states these create. Aside from the challenges we face at home and school, there are also politicians shouting at us, corporate forces pulling at us, and the endless rhetoric about a world on the verge of collapse.
I used to see Science as the key to understanding, fixing or even 'saving' the World, but now I see its limitations as a singular approach. My DofE residential at the Ancient Technology Centre was a turning point in my outlook. It immersed me in an experience that was in pronounced opposition to the very compartmentalized method that school "subjects" used. I had the opportunity to hear and tell stories in ways the Vikings comprehended and expressed their ideas and feelings against the backdrop of their time, place, and culture. Giving me an insight into what sense-making meant to them in ways I had not experienced. I had heard about transdisciplinary courses, but it wasn't until something clicked that I actually understood how well they suited my own thinking and approaches.
Don't misunderstand me - the subjects I have studied I love, and have given me a firm foundation to get where I am. If the sciences had not been a part of my growing up, to help channel my curiosity towards directed inquiry, minded towards hypothesis forming, and encouraged systematicity in my thinking, I do not think I would have got so much out of my studies so far. But it was when I started economics that I got to step outside the natural sciences and into the social, letting me see the horizons of my knowledge opening up.
I first heard mention of the term 'nexialist' in 'The Voyage of the Space Beagle' (van Vogt, 1950). Despite being 'made up' by the author, the concept of being at the 'nexus' of many different interlinked disciplines lives with me.
As I explore topics like society and social structure further, and consider the implications of a future in which "Humans and Things" coexist (or, perhaps, might not) in Society. I have been pursuing the idea that, at least for my college years, there is a "depth in breadth" worth examining, but with new focus and direction. The further I go, the greater the affinity I feel with von Vogt's view - to paraphrase: 'specialization is for insects'. In tomorrow's world, those insects might be the "Things", but as a "Human", wanting to go the transdisciplinary route, I am applying to study with you.
To continue this journey further, I need a university whose offer goes beyond the rhetoric of 'world-class research', 'strong student community' and 'excellent National Student Survey results'. I want to be somewhere that will open my eyes, scaffold my learning and make me a more sophisticated person. I am coming to university for only a fraction of my life, but I know it will be a transformative experience that will affect the time beyond the rest of it.